casino executives. The former boss and
chief legal officer cop huge fines and
company bans
and questions over whether a Trump
promise on the straight of Hormuz and a
peace deal can end the oil shock.
The war is definitely not over. There's
still a lot more negotiations that need
to take place.
Welcome to the business. I'm Kristen
Aken. It's been a tough day in court for
two former Star Casino executives. The
former CEO has been hit with a $700,000
fine and banned from running companies
for six years. The former chief legal
officer fined $400,000 and slapped with
a ban. The pair were accused of failing
to tackle money laundering risks posed
by Chinese junket operators inside the
casino. Our reporter Daniel Ziffer was
there. Dan, it was a bad day in court
for these former executives and a bad
day for Star, but not as bad as it could
have been.
That's right. So, former CEO Matt Beckia
and former Chief Law Officer Paula
Martin uh received their lumps today. We
already knew that they'd been uh found
to have breached these director's
duties. Today, we found out the
penalties. So for the former CEO, a fine
of $700,000
and being disqualified from holding
directorships essentially from running
companies for six years. For his former
chief counsel Paula Martin, a fine of
$400,000 and disqualified from running
companies for 7 years. Now this is far
less than the regulator ASICH was
seeking. They wanted 1.3 million, $1.1
million. Um so vastly under what was
sought, but still a substantial penalty.
uh in the realm of white collar crime.
How did the judge come to his decision?
Well, this is all about serious
allegations about money laundering by
Chinese criminal gangs and the stars
failure to take enough serious action to
prevent it. So, he talked about the
casino sector being pregnant with risks
and how uh Mr. Beckia and Ms. Martin
simply didn't do enough when they were
presented with evidence of serious
allegations of money laundering by
criminal gangs. Uh so what it
essentially was about a failure to do
their job uh to show enough diligence
and to take further and hire these
really serious allegations made by
external reports and others that said
money laundering was occurring at their
casinos. Now, the penalties probably
weren't as much as we thought they might
be. Uh, in fact, I spoke to, uh,
corporate governance expert Helen Bird
about that very point.
But on a longer term level, you also
have to ask the question, what's it
going to take before we actually say
these people deserve to be fined very
significant amounts of money? Uh,
because we're not doing it. Um, and as I
said, the the first fine is just under
50% of what would potentially be the
maximum fine. Dan, it was the corporate
regulator that brought the case against
Star, but the judge delivered some
scathing criticism of ASICH as well as
other non-executive directors of the
casino.
Yes, he certainly said uh that the
non-executive directors who didn't get
pinged for uh this misconduct were in no
way exonerated by uh that finding. He
talks about their failure uh to be
curious and to do the diligence required
even when these allegations were being
raised by the media and in independent
inquiries as well as internally. But
there was a a strange kind of uh poison
pill for ASICH who had brought this
case. Now earlier before the
proceedings, two quite senior star
executives had essentially agreed to
terms. They were fined $180,000 and
$60,000 and disqualified for a period
from running uh companies. What Justice
Michael Lee said was asset couldn't
essentially treat some contraventions
lightly and then ask him to throw the
book at others just because they'd been
proven out. So he said that the
penalties suffered today were materially
lower than they would have been had
ASICH not done that.
Daniel Zepha, thank you.
All the best. The price of rent crude
has continued to tumble as the signing
ceremony for the US Iran ceasefire
nears. Rank crude was down to just over
$76 at the market close. Even if the
ceasefire agreement holds, the conflict
hasn't ended and there are warnings that
the nature of conflict itself is
changing with implications for financial
stability. Echoing sentiments expressed
earlier from the banking regulator chair
John Lndale, the Reserve Bank's Brad
Jones said there is evidence the
international financial system is
fragmenting upon geopolitical lines.
The fact there've been no hot wars among
the great powers for decades has given
this concept of an alternative battle
space additional emp impetus. for more.
Commonwealth Bank's geo economist
Madison Cartwright joined me.
Welcome. The signing ceremony hasn't
happened, but is the war over? Is that
why the price of Brent crude is
plunging?
Uh, the war is not over. This is
obviously a good development in a
deescalatory trajectory for the war, but
the war is definitely not over. There's
still a lot more negotiations that need
to take place. Um, and this is just a
ceasefire um that will come before a
longer peace process. Um, and the more
sticky questions around Iran's nuclear
program and the future of the straight
of Hammuz is just beginning to be
negotiated now. So, there's still a lot
more to go.
The US has been criticized for ending up
with a deal that is worse than what was
there before the first shots were fired.
Is that your view?
Well, the United States has clearly made
a series of concessions in the
memorandum of understanding. We don't
know obviously what's fully in it. Um
but based on what has been put out in
the public, it is clear that the United
States has um walked back a few of its
red lines and has made a number of
concessions to to Iran to get it over
the line. And this reflects the fact
that the dynamics of the conflict were
not favoring the United States. The
Iranians were able to restrict and more
or less close the straight of Hamuz uh
with little effort. It seems um drone
and missile technology means they didn't
need to rely on things like mines or a
navy in order to do this. Um and we also
know that their ballistic missile
program um has been very robust. Um it
appears that they've maintained a great
deal of the stockpiles of their missiles
and they have been used very effectively
throughout the Gulf and in Israel. Um
and this means that a military solution
for the United States remained evasive.
And that's the reason why they had to
come to the negotiating table and
ultimately offer up concessions. And we
had long said um that this war would
only really start to wind down once the
United States realized that the only way
to progress with the peace negotiations
was to make concessions.
Well, Iran does know as does the world
that it can close shipping through the
straight of Hormuz. So even with the
ceasefire, is the Middle East in a more
fragile position now than it was before
the US and Israel began?
Yes. I mean I think the entire security
architecture of the the Middle East will
have to be renegotiated at this stage.
Um there has been extensive damage done
to military bases um US military bases
throughout the Gulf. Um they will have
to be rebuilt that will need to be paid
for. So who pays for this? Do we
actually want an a military base here at
all? These sorts of questions will start
to come up. I think you'll see um
particularly the Gulf States start to um
not move away from the United States
necessarily, but start to hedge a little
bit more. try to think about what are
the other security partners they can
bring in, other security partners they
can work with while still trying to
remain access um retain access should I
say um to um US um um equipment. So they
still want to buy the good equipment
from the United States. They want to
have good relationships with the United
States. Um but in this in this conflict
having US bases did not protect them
from being bombed. So they're going to
start thinking about what else what
other options are available to them.
Is the oil shock over?
The oil shock is not over. um we first
need to wait and see how the opening of
the straight progresses um how quickly
traffic can get through. We also don't
know how um um insurance is going to
work out and whether or not ships will
be able to get the insurance they need
to go back um and whether or not they'll
want to go back at all. Um so all of
these questions need to be answered. We
also don't know the full extent of the
damage done to infrastructure in the
region. So there's still a lot of
unknowns about how quickly that supply
can come back on. The chair of the
banking regulator APA John Lndale and
the RBA's Brad Jones today warned that
the current geopolitical environment is
such that finance and technology are
becoming the epicenter of grayzone
activity. Are the Australian financial
system and Australian businesses now
finding themselves in what Brad Jones
calls an alternative battle space? Well,
I think what we're seeing is that
countries are using a greater variety of
tactics. Um, and this comes from two
sources. The first is a position of
strength and we see the United States
use this in financial markets for
example quite extensively and in
technology where they retain a very
favorable position. Um, and this is an
alternative to um other forms of
coercion and they're making more use of
this and other countries are starting to
do that more. You we see that from China
for example with rare earth minerals.
The other aspect is this more asymmetric
aspect and and that's what we've seen
play out in Iran and we might start to
think of what are the other ways that
countries can from a weaker position uh
leverage what they have in order to
exert some type of economic coercion. Um
so we need to broaden our understanding
of what security is what economic
security is um and understand that e
economic interconnectedness is creating
avenues for weaponization as well. What
do Australian businesses and board
directors need to be cognizant of in
this environment?
I think we just need to be um thinking a
bit more critically about where
vulnerabilities may lie and things that
we took for granted would always be
there or would be secure are becoming um
uh more dubious, right? Uh so the the
global economy has run off a series of
standards and norms that things just
kind of run this way and that will
always kind of be the case. That is
what's changing. Uh so things that we
used to take for granted need to be
reassessed and things that we thought
may not be sources of vulnerability
might become sources of vulnerability
and we need to interrogate more
holistically what our supply chains look
like and where those vulnerabilities may
be
and is Australia
as as a country moving fast enough to
address the challenge. Well, the
Australian government has prioritized a
number of areas in this space, but the
the important thing is that this
ultimately needs to be paid for in some
way and that will always be a political
question, right? So, uh if we want to
move away from Chinese supply chains for
um critical minerals and rare earth for
example, there's a lot of opportunity
for Australia in that space, but we're
not really going to be able to compete
with China on price here. So, someone
needs to pay and who's that going to be?
Um and those sorts of questions are are
what are hibiting some of the progress
in these areas and that will continue to
come up not just in critical minerals
but a whole host of other areas as well.
Madison Cartright, thank you.
Thank you.
There were moderate rises across the
board on local markets. The ASX 200 and
all ordinaries finished up around half a
percent. The Australian dollar is flat
and buying 70 and a half US cents. The
Australian fashion retailer glue store
has announced its permanent closure.
Earlier this year, the company posted an
$ 8.4 million loss and announced its
business would be wound down. It's more
evidence headwinds are growing for the
retail sector, which in recent weeks has
seen Lincraft close physical stores and
barbecues galore enter liquidation.
Montgomery Investment Manager founder
Roger Montgomery joined me.
Welcome. Glue store had announced its
business would be wound down some time
ago, but its parent company received an
unsolicited takeover bid from UK retail
group Frasers just 2 days before the
brand's permanent closure was announced.
The timing is interesting. Could the two
announcements be linked? Roger,
look, conceptually they are linked. Uh
but really this is this is about
opportunity. as you said in your uh
mentioned in your question uh we already
knew back in February that glue stores
were going to be wound down or sold or
exited. Uh so there's nothing new about
that. Uh this really is the result I
think of dissatisfaction
uh with management's policy to pay a
dividend particularly given uh like forl
like sales stores declines uh and also
uh rising debt uh and a failure to roll
out sporting goods stores at at a pace
that satisfied phrases.
Now in recent weeks we've seen some
retailers such as Lincraft close
physical shop fronts while continuing to
offer stock online. Can we expect more
big names to follow suit?
Definitely. Uh what we're seeing at the
moment is structural. Uh it's a
consequence of rising rates, rising
wages, and declining foot traffic. Uh
what what was once a prized possession
that being a a national store network uh
is now a noose around the neck of many
retailers. uh even and and made more
acute by the fact that we've got the
likes of Amazon, Shine and Teu uh
selling product at 50 60 70% lower
prices than what's available uh in
retail store networks in Australia. So
the shift towards online uh is going to
accelerate even more now.
What does that say about the future
fortunes of Australia's big but revenue
troubled department stores Meer and
David Jones? Well, department stores
have been walking dinosaurs for a couple
of decades now. Their their struggle is
with relevance to the consumer in
Australia. Uh Meyer is doing a slightly
better defensive job than David Jones.
David Jones problem is that they they uh
sell to a a higherend
uh customer uh with very very high
rents. And when that customer zips up
their wallet, when they stop spending,
then suddenly there's a there's an
enormous burden on margins, uh, as I
mentioned, Mer's doing a slightly better
job, but ultimately they're both going
to struggle in terms of relevance with
the Australian consumer.
Roger Montgomery, good to speak to you.
Always a pleasure.
And that's all from the business. For
more on those stories, head to the ABC
News website. And you can catch the
program anytime on ABC View. I'm Kirsten
Aken. Thanks for watching.
Kana. and welcome back to another week
of Pacifica sporting action. Today I'm
joined by my trusty co-host Sammy.
What's we making the news this week?
See, actually there's a lot happening in
sport this week. Super Rugby Pacific
Grand F. Looking forward to that one.
But um something different actually
that's caught my eyes. Uh the football
soccer cup.
Um
the Have you seen the Dr. Congo their
suit thing the leopard print?
I think that's my new go-to to come on
the couch. I I'll request that one. But
uh no, pretty excited for the soccer
world cup. I'm not really a football man
or soccer man, but yeah, enjoyed um
enjoyed some of the commentary coming
out of the US with their carry on about
how they're going to beat the Socceroos
or it's going to be a layup. So, all
eyes on there.
Yeah, so exciting to see the Australian
soccer get their first win against Tokya
2-0. And I know that everyone was
absolutely buzzing all the way around
the country. Uh and we could see as well
some footage online on ABC Pacific of uh
a soccer mad country, Vanuatu, getting
really behind a whole bunch of different
teams. Yeah, Vanuatu. Honestly, they are
soccer mad. I know we don't have um any
uh Pacific Island Nations representing
at the World Cup, but still like it is
uh football crazy over in Vanuatu as
well as Solomon's and PNG, but man, like
just seeing the um seeing the fans go
crazy over their teams like they're
drawing the lines on who they are are
choosing. I believe the favorite in
Vanuatu is Brazil because of Neymar. Uh
so they've got parties going on and
apparently as well that they uh whoever
they're supporting they get their flags
and try and find the highest point in
Vanuatu and climb up there and stick it
on there to take their claims. So plenty
over there. But yeah, looking forward to
seeing how how mad they go and how crazy
they go on some of those wins.
You and I both. We love a World Cup no
matter what code it is. And today we're
joined in the studio by not one but two
Cook Island rugby stars who also happen
to be related. Elelliana Walton, a
standout rugby league international, and
Jack Deperini, who has made his mark in
rugby union, playing around the world
and representing the Cook Islands on the
international stage. Great to have you
both with with us. Welcome to the show.
Thanks for having us.
Thank you. Thanks for having us.
I'll start with you, L. Can you give us
a little insight into where you grew up,
your family heritage, what life was like
growing up alongside each other? You got
any funny stories for us?
I remember Jack coming over as a little
5-year-old. Uh we just went to the park
to play touch as you do on a Sunday. Uh
I think auntie and then he had come over
from Australia and Jack was only five
and ended up turning into a full-on
match and he was scoring tries and
running rings around all of us older
kids and uh we just knew he was a freak
back then. Um and we didn't want to
play. He was only five. He was only five
back then. So that was my fondest memory
of my cousin.
What about you, Jack? What are some of
your fondest memories growing up? Uh,
it's probably been a pest to the older
cousins. Like my vision of that story is
probably like I would have been
complaining if dad made some wrong
calls. I would have chucked the ball on
the ground.
Probably would have thought like who's
this pest like he's just small loser.
Um, so yeah, having a big family um in
Oakuckland, lots of cousins, there was
lots of sports in Nana's back uh back
garden um and along the street. So it
was always good times.
Yeah, really active family. But what was
it like growing up in um such a an
active family that was so involved in
sport but also really involved in the
community as well?
Our family um our Cook Island side are
very versatile. They have marathon
runners. My dad's a marathon runner and
a martial artist. We got rugby union
players. We got boxers, crossfitters.
So like there's a few Yeah. different
variety of sporting um members in our
family. So net ballers as well is
another big thing. So yeah,
very talented family. Eh,
Jack, we go back a long way um back to
our West Harour days. You know, I think
my uncle coached Stew and my cousin in
that same team back in the under 10s.
And what was it like for you as a
youngster just, you know, picking up a
rugby ball and
just running with with it and and having
a bit of fun there at Wes?
Yes, like obviously um being around the
club for so long. Um that sort of builds
the passion for the game. um being a
ball boy um since I was probably six or
seven running around seeing superstars
like yourself on the field. Um no, but
just like the the way Thanks mate, I
appreciate that.
The way that the rugby community is,
especially in Sydney. Um that's sort of
what uh drove that passion for the game.
Um Tuesday, Thursday nights um down at
St. Luke's Oval in Concord. That's
probably where it all started for me. Um
and it just continued from there. And
Elelliana, for you, I know when I came
back to the sport of Rugby League in
2019, you were one of the OGs, one of
the the main leaders that I looked up to
and idolized to when I started making my
first rep teams in New South Wales and
Australia. I know you've been around the
game for a really long time and as I
said, one of those pioneer women. When
did you uh you know, early in your
career realize that rugby league was
going to be a genuine pathway for
yourself?
I was probably the same as Jack. So, my
um I'm third generation that played. My
grandma played, my from my sour side, my
mom played and all the females in my
family played rugby league and rugby
union. Um I was that little girl that
used to pick up all the cones at
training in Oakland. Whatever the coach
wanted, that was me. And then I think
when I came moved to Brisbane, I was 15
and auntie was the coach of um Holy
Spirit and Brisbane and she needed
players. She didn't have enough players
back then and I was only 15. Um, I had
to sign a waiver to play uh open women's
back then and I was the youngest player.
Um, yeah, coming through that grades in
the Brisbane Cup back then. Yeah, it was
a long long time ago. So, I think that
just um set the fire for me. Did you
ever run into any challenges through
your family? because I know um it really
varies from from household to household.
And I know there are some of the the
women that came before us that were part
of that pioneer group um that really
struggled to have their families accept
that they were playing a male dominant
sport and and that contact barrier. Um
traditionally as you know as someone
with Tongen heritage like it's it was
really taboo for us to to be women that
played contact sport because it just
wasn't feminine. Um but I know it's very
different from different cultures. Did
you ever run into any of those
challenges with your family or know any
stories of anyone that did?
I know a lot of my mates too, especially
the Tongen girls like My Nest and them
used to tell us all the time that they
weren't allowed to play, but I think for
myself um coming from, you know, rugby,
rugby union, rugby league family and mom
being supportive, um no, I never really
found that uh a hurdle or anything. Um
more importantly, my mom was a bigger
supporter for me and my career. She
she'd be my go-to every time I would
have a big match or anything. I would
call her and just trying to calm my
nerves and stuff and she would just tell
me just go out there and whack everybody
and like so having the support from my
mom um yeah it was probably a stable for
me in my career.
Jack, for you growing up in Australia
and New Zealand, did you feel a strong
sense of connection to your Cook Island
culture?
I reckon um growing up my connection was
always when I went back to New Zealand.
grew up in Australia, went back to New
Zealand, um, and being around my nan
again. Um, yeah, but it wouldn't be I
wouldn't say it was too strong. I think
I found it more later in life. Um, which
has been really special the last couple
years. Um, but yeah, being around Nan,
um, she's always uh, dressed up in her
beautiful outfits. Um, so you got to see
this amazing, strong woman that was
proud of Cook Island heritage. Um, and
yeah, it was always something cool to
see and be a part of every time I went
home uh to New Zealand. M
Jack, I didn't realize you were cook uh
cookie until the indigenous Pacifica
game against the Lions last year and I
saw you I was like, "Oh, where's Jack? I
thought you moldy." But um after all
that time and then when I found out I
was like, "Awesome. Got to get you on
the show at some point." But um how is
how did that experience but also how has
rugby helped connect you to um you know
your Pacific Island side?
Yeah, I think uh that experience was
awesome. Um my first probably
breakthrough was maybe I want to say
2019 2018 Justin Masters um who's proud
Cook Island man uh at our club at West
Harour. We do a um island night and he
convinced he pretty much told me I had
to be a part of the Cook Island boys cuz
there only five or six compared to all
the PG and Sam and Tongans. Um and he he
drove me to perform and um learn a lot
about the Cook Island culture and put me
out of my comfort zone. And I remember
performing that night. Um, it brought a
lot of like pride back into me. Um, I
guess growing up not really being around
my nan all the time. Not that I was
ashamed of my Cook Island sub, I just
didn't know enough. Um, and always felt
like I wasn't Cook Islands and enough to
represent or be proud in that way. So,
um, that was a really groundbreaking
night for me to be like, no, no matter
how much percentage of Cook Islands you
are, you are Cook Island end of the day.
Um, and that was a really proud moment.
So yeah, a lot of thanks goes to Justin
Masters.
How many weeks uh leading into that did
you is that what is that you say?
Yeah, it was like 10 weeks and he had us
like he had us like Monday, Wednesday,
Friday practicing. Um yeah, so it was an
intense training camp,
but I think we performed pretty well. So
what's more nerve-wracking than
practicing that?
I was in front of the mirror trying to
get my knees moving for weeks, trying to
get the low highs, like make sure it
wasn't like a chicken dance.
Yeah, there was a lot of practice going
into that. But yeah, that was proud. And
then moving on to um Lion's game last
year to be around a lot of Pacific
Island indigenous people. U we had Moana
from Rugby Australia who came in and
helped us all week. Um and she drove a
lot around just being proud of where we
come from. Um our people, our connection
and our similarities, especially between
the Pacific and indigenous people. Um so
yeah, that week in particular was really
awesome.
And for you, Elelliana, as well, you've
worn numerous um international jerseys.
You've represented Australian Gilleroo,
the Cook Island Moana, uh and the Fetu
Samoa as well. Can you tell us, you
know, the difference between wearing
those jerseys and how um much they mean
to be able to, you know, pull them on
your back and then feel like you're
pulling the colors of your nation on
your back? I think for the opportunity
to make Gilleroo was the highlight of my
career was amazing because just the
standard the Gilleroo uphold. Um and I
love the things about the Giller is was
about the ANZAC spirit. I love that. Um
you know being Kiwi but being raised in
Australia that's something I take a lot
of pride in. Um and to be able to wear
that for 10 years I wore the Gilleries
jersey. Um I was really proud of that
moment. Um, and then to be able to play
for Sam War, I didn't realize the
magnitude of it, um, until I spoke to my
mom about it and she said, you know,
these girls look up to you, you know,
um, you need to really uphold, um, that
standards you've learned from Australia
and bring it into Fetu. Um, and that's
something that I I did when I was there
and got to captain them. Sour is such a
proud proud nation. You know, obviously
we can see the way that they're
flourishing right now. Um and I think I
was coming through at the time when it
was really hard to play for um our
island nation. Um but then to be able to
create that pathway for Cook Islands um
was something special too cuz I was
coach and player like that as well. Um
they're all very different but all very
similar. I don't know how to explain it
but I never take a jersey for granted
because I always think about the people
that it um is special to like the people
back in the islands, the little ones in
the villages and stuff like that. Um, I
always think about that. I think about
the people that um did a lot for our
nations and the sacrifices that our
people make. Um, so yeah, every jersey
is special. And I think I've got a
collection of jerseys in the closet
and they're the first things I'll be
grabbing in a fire. So I'll be like
grabbing my jerseys and I'm out. So
yeah, they're very special to me. How
happy does it make you that you actually
got to just not only represent one
nation but like three and then to be
able to then tell your kids that yeah
this is the jersey when I represented
cookies and sour and the jeweler is like
how happy does that make you?
Oh I'm like just over the moon cuz now
now it's coming into fruition of
everything that what we ever dreamed of
as um you know football players. My kids
are proud. I think my son doesn't
understand it just yet. He's only 15.
But um my daughter, she's just like,
"Cool, mom." You know, but that's cool.
Um but I think my son, he understood it
last year when he got to represent Sour
for Rugby Union. And having the
opportunity to play for the island
nations now is um at at the grasp of it.
So yeah, it it's I think it makes them
proud. My husband's proud of it no
matter what I do. So yeah,
Jackie recently reached 100 games in
your career. Uh Elelliana, you organized
his Achu and the lay presentation for
that jersey presentation. Why was that
important to you to be able to be part
of that milestone moment for him? And um
can you talk talk to us about the
process and the thought that went into
it? Um well I I think just the
ceremonial like significance behind
getting a lay and um you know just the
ceremonial thing the value of that is it
may be just flowers to other people but
for us it's something really really
special. Um and I know Jack with his
culture didn't you know hasn't been able
to experience much of that. Um whereas I
have with my Cook Island culture I
danced I represented a lot of um dancing
as Cook Islander and sour um but even
with the the aut
no boys wear it too cuz it's it's a
significant part of our culture. So I
just wanted to make him feel special cuz
that 100 games over however long it was
all the sacrifices I understand um that
he's been through. So, I wanted him to
make him feel special for his game.
And for you, Jack, how did that make you
feel having that um that culture and
tradition and ceremony, you know, passed
to you in that moment?
Yeah. No, it was awesome. Yeah, I really
appreciated what she put in the effort
um that night, it was a shock and when I
saw it, it actually hit me pretty hard.
Um like Ellie, she doesn't know this,
but I remember when I was younger, we
went and watched her play a trial game.
Like, obviously, she lived in New
Zealand, I lived in Australia. I hadn't
seen her for a long time and she played
this cup game um out west and I was like
able to see someone else in my family
achieving things through sport and rugby
and it was a big motivator for me. Um
yeah, didn't know that. So like and
she's always been the pioneer for our
family or especially for me like um what
she's done in her career. Um so yeah to
have her present that to me um and like
I said I'm newly in a space of trying to
um understand more about my culture to
have that um in recognition of the 100
games u meant a lot um to me
I think also too cuz I had brought my
league and union boys to present it to
so I told my sisters make heaps of lolly
lays but I don't know if you'll eat the
lolly llays but we're just Yeah. So the
boys my whole footy team came and put it
on them as well. So yeah, it was cool.
Jack, you know, at that Pacific
Indigenous Game, you told me after
you're going to retire,
you know, that was you done and D. I was
like,
"Yeah, we'll see." Um, there's those
sliding door moments and the opportunity
got to, you know, play for the wars. Do
you reflect back on that and just go,
"Wow, I got to if I had retired, I
wouldn't have had my 100th game. I
wouldn't have had that moment." Do you
reflect on that and just say, "I'm glad
I kept going."
Uh, yeah, definitely. I think when I
made that decision to you, my body was
broken. But uh thanks to Tom Carter, he
got it going again. Um but yeah,
definitely reflect that. Um I think at
the time I was like, "Yeah, I would like
to get to that 100, but it seemed so far
away, but now that I continued to push
on and got the opportunity to, um yeah,
it's it's been awesome this past year."
And to have experiences like that after
the Brumy's game, um to share that with
my cousin was awesome. And to share that
moment with uh with your mom and dad
like uh Mick, you again, I've known you
for a long time. your mom dies. Probably
one of the best uh I think people that
you can have at Club's footy, you know,
the the volunteer work that she does,
amazing, beautiful soul. But to to share
that moment with her, uh what was that
like?
Yeah. Well, I guess um like most
players, your family and probably your
partners, they ride the highs and lows
as much as you. Um and they get to
experience the good and the bad. So, as
much as your journey is for yourself, I
I believe it's for them as well. Um, so
those moments of success, um, there's no
one else you want to be celebrating that
with than your parents and your loved
ones. So, yeah, it was awesome, um, to
be able to experience that with my mom
and dad who have done a lot, uh,
throughout my career.
Ellie, for you, I think a lot of us, um,
fans of rugby league expected to see you
playing a little longer. What ultimately
led to your decision to retire and step
out of the game? I kept trying to force
it like force force myself into spaces
and I just wasn't supposed to be there
and and then I think um also doing my
knee was another
do my knee was another thing but yeah
just the uh I never have done my knee in
in 25 years of playing footy but that
was really hard to try and come back to
so I think I rehabed for almost 2 years
um and Mel's put me back together uh my
club uh that I lost last played for.
Just the patience and you have to learn
as an athlete. Um, and then I just
thought, yeah, I think I'm not supposed
to be here anymore. Like, God's trying
to tell me to go somewhere else. So,
yeah, I think I made a decision and I
was comfortable with that. I love
seeing, you know, ex players that have
such an illustrious career then go back
and give to Pathways. You've been
coaching Pathways for a while now. uh
what's the key to communicating and
unlocking those younger athletes that
are still finding themselves physically
and also mentally? I just try and um I
don't hold back information. So
everything I learned at um rep level and
stuff, I just give it all to the kids.
Um so currently coaching under 15 boys
um I do everything from mindfulness,
breath work, um just a holistic approach
of an athlete. Um, you can't demand so
much from an athlete physically if
you're not preparing them off the field
as well. Um, my coaching style pretty
straight up when it comes to coaching
just like your leadership style.
There's straight up look like to you.
Penalties. Drop a ball is penalties. You
get on the line.
And it's funny cuz like it's like I'm a
math teacher. So every drop ball is a
set of six. So you times that by six.
How much how much does he get?
Yeah. So I'm pretty tough like that. you
good at penalties in your team then if I
was head coached by you.
Plenty of drop balls there.
Yeah. But it's it's cool like cuz you
got to the new age athlete is different
to when I was playing. Um so just the
pressures that the young ones have like
with social media and being always up
here. Um I'm pretty mindful of that. So
yeah, that's my approach is the whole
holistic approach of the athlete.
Jack, just on that obviously you've um
are you retiring? No, you still going
again? No, I think I'm maybe this time.
Maybe this time you're going to stop.
Yeah, it could be a sliding doors moment
again.
Yeah, it could be. Never say never. But
um when you when you reflect on your
career as a as a youngster, you know,
coming through at 20 to now being like
33, 34, um what would you say is
required if you are to go to that next
level? What's something that's
definitely concrete that's required?
I think you got to have uh great
perseverance cuz like tough times will
come. Um, so you got to understand like
I guess people talk about their why, but
you got to have a deep passion for the
game and want to persevere through tough
times because you really enjoy playing,
you love competing, um, or you have
other reasons why you play um, for
family. Um, I think that's important
thing and I think you you can just never
stop with the love and joy of the game.
I think once that goes it becomes really
tough to keep going. Um, so yeah, for
anyone young out there, continue to play
the game that you love, but also um, you
got to have a bit of behind you to make
sure that through the tough times you
continue. Well, Jack, you have my number
if you need help in retirement. But from
fields in Fiji to rebuilding a club
thousands of kilometers from home, this
is more than rugby. It's culture,
family, and connection brought together
through the game.
It's my hobby back home. Since I was a
kid, I grew up in uh playing rugby in
the village.
When you go to Fiji, even if you pass
the beach or the village in the
afternoon, you see everyone playing
rugby.
For me personally, all all of us
Fijians, we like rugby. We we love
playing rugby.
Postco um we had a lot of numbers drop
off.
I had a phone call from the current club
president Carl Dicks essentially just uh
saying that he needed a hand with the
club reset in the club this year as they
were going to hand the keys back to the
local council.
We call some friends of mine who are a
part of Melbourne Fiji Association and
um yeah they really help me out with the
guys. So it's been great boys.
Once one Fijian goes to a club usually
25 follow and um you know that's been
really special for the club that have
been at such a strong Fijian contingent.
the club has excelled this year. We've
had multiple boys come in from um
through that culture and then the
churches and things like that. So, word
spread and um yeah, they're all starting
to come down.
They're all strong ball carriers and
they got that flare
and yeah, it's just great to watch and
just great to play with.
I've been in Australia 10 and a half
years.
Come to Australia because to help the
family back home, sending money home and
uh looking after the nephew and uh
everyone who needs help.
The boys are from all over Fiji. Um
predominantly a lot of the guys are from
uh the palm workers scheme um which has
been an incredible initiative obviously
down in Victoria.
I came to Australia through the Pacific
scheme
uh about the Pacific from the Pacific.
We came to work here at Abato.
Financial wise, it's good to be in
Australia. The first pay I got, I I go
and ask my boss, get is this the real
pay or you guys pay me extra? Cuz I
didn't see that kind of money making FIJ
when you get paid here. I normally send
it to my parents to support them because
I'm not from the main island. I'm from
another island. So, we have to came to
the main island through uh the ships. It
takes uh one whole night.
Predominately the language spoken within
the team is Fijian. We've got some
translators that do some fantastic work
for us. Um but yeah, aside from that, we
yeah, really do struggle between the
English and the Fijian.
Well, they all speak Fijian pretty much
and no, I don't speak Fijian. So, yeah,
it's bit challenge, but then
there is a bit of a language barrier.
Yeah. But we we make do and it's worked
so far. Some of uh players are still
new. So it's good that we play together.
We know know each other speaking same
language. It was good.
The boys are leaving their family back
home and are coming here and it's very
hard for them because leaving their
loved ones and their little ones back in
Fiji, they quite a challenge in dealing
with them around here.
Some of them are missing home. That's
why we bring them together and uh stay
connected every week and uh if they need
help, we help each other
at first uh two months. Yes. Yeah.
I wasn't myself when I was going to work
like most of the time I was missing
home.
Sometimes can be hard. My whole family
is back home. It's just me here alone.
It's like a family big family. uh
southern district. Yeah, it's like we're
building a big family here, Fiji
community.
We all brothers looking after each other
in Fiji. What's uh makes us feel
comfortable
as we when we come together and sing a
song uh any kind of song we sing but for
us in this team we sing a gospel song
prior to every game we encourage you
know we have a song and then a prayer
and then uh we basically have just a few
moments of silence then we come straight
out and and battle it's fantastic.
For us Fijian like uh saving God is one
of the most important thing that we do
every day. So our relationship with God
is we take it to everywhere we go like
for work and like for rugby most because
we believe that uh we don't gain our
strength by ourselves. We ask the Lord
to give us our strength. So when we
sing, we like we holding each other as a
brothers
and we're going to do this together.
Just one thing, guys.
Yeah, it's just incredible. Like you
come down to the club now and they go,
"Oh, wow. South, you know, bit of bullet
music and you know, it's just
incredible." Like you go down for a
night out and it's uh very very cool.
Cara bowls and you know we've really
embraced the culture and yeah the boys
really get a lot out of it.
Polynisians are all the same I think. Um
especially in terms of value and family
and what's important to them. So um no I
think it's those boys need deserve the
credit that they've brought the club
back to where where it should be.
They've completely rebuilt it. It's been
a quite a joy to coach these fellas this
year. uh and just with the atmosphere
that they bring, the music, the culture,
um and also just the uh the general just
sort of banner in the in the locker
rooms and things like that. It's been an
absolute privilege to coach these boys.
How important are sports clubs for
Pacific Islander players living away
from home?
I think cuz everyone's there for the
same purpose and they all have the same
values and um it's it's just exciting to
go and see all your mates and stuff and
people you see nearly every week, you
know, um say on a Tuesday, Thursday and
it's like you've never seen them in a
long time but you only just saw them the
other day. So yeah, it's just that
connection and all having the same
values.
Jack, the coach spoke about embracing
their Fijian culture, how they they sing
before their games. They say prayer in
your experience. What teams have done
that well and why?
Uh when I was at the Chiefs, um
I remember
we used to sing a song at the start of
every meeting. So it would either be
Fijian, Samoan, Tongen, or Moldi. Um and
I think that really embraced all the
cultures that are amongst um that
environment. I remember that Fijian boy
would get up. Um he would start the hymn
and then we'd all go and if anyone
special came to the building or anyone
came in to present, we'd always finish
with a song. Um and yeah, that was quite
unique to what I experienced before, but
I thought they did it the best um that
I've seen enabling all cultures to feel
safe in that environment and everyone to
buy in and understand everyone else's
cultures, which I think drove belonging
amongst the group.
Yeah, that's awesome. I'm so jealous of
you that you got that experience. Well,
that's all from us uh today for this
episode. A big thank you to you both,
Ellie and Jack, for joining us and being
part of our show today. Don't forget,
you can keep up with all the latest
sporting stories from across the Pacific
by following ABC Pacific on socials.
Maki for watching and until next time.
Hey
la.
The new kind of CCTV camera.
Video manipulation.
How can we believe what we see?